in September of 1981 as a staff nurse and worked on one of the villas there for six months.
And then I was promoted to the charge nurse position on another villa, which was,
just carrying on that, which was very interesting because it was
in the way in which the area was organized it was probably seen as a very difficult
villa and no one was expected to stay there for very long in charge. It was where you were young
green people were put because of its difficulties and you weren't supposed to like it but you sort
of did your six months there and then you moved to somewhere that was a bit nicer you know it was
that sort of thing. Like everywhere it was understaffed but it was a very male dominated
staff group and I could see straight away that that wasn't particularly good. There was
there was a sort of a bit of a lads attitude amongst the staff
and there was only one female there and I felt that we certainly needed more definitely.
I think not necessarily I mean I wasn't privy to any in those days I wasn't privy to any
reasons why people should be moved or put in different places but I knew sometimes it was
used as a punishment ward in the hospital managers at the time if someone was you know this was long
before staff had appraisals and things like that. If you were seen as a bad member of staff
you would get moved to this particular area. In the few years I was there and I was there from 1981
until the end of 1986 the villa was transformed I think to from the back ward to the best one
and people wanted to come and work there because they saw that the attitudes amongst the staff
were positive they were different. I mean Lin was one who came as a youngster 18
and I think you know we got the staff to work as a team there was a better approach obviously
but I think how did you know in yeah I think I think we allowed sort of
how did the residents react I think we allowed sort of personal relationships
improve really you know I think the staff actually noticed the likes and dislikes of particular
individuals which was which was amazing you know it was something that I think a lot of people
hadn't considered before and for example I had I think about activities one member of staff
who liked walking and I said well you know we've got some young active men here I think it was it
really in my view and the you know memory fades a bit but it was that the Walsh office taking away
the prospect of the simple as that the prospect of um resettlement we realized that we had
quite a few years left in the hospital and we wanted to do something positive you know rather
than just tread water and that was that was the worst possible you know that's what I said about
this you know you can't tread water these are people with there you know and so we again Dave
and one or two others were absolutely fantastic prime movers in this there were some really really
good staff there who were you know we looked at everything in depth you know why do we do this what
why why why do we you know what what is wrong with our practice you know and these were people
by and large who had very good practice for the times you know what I mean you know but they were
looking at all these sort of things and so the staff the staff meetings that we had um in those
days where um anyone could come along were unbelievable in terms of the the ideas and the
the thoughts that were coming out it was a very positive movement very positive and Dave and Pete
and Isabel and one or two others were prime movers in encouraging that and out of that not only came
a sort of um uh an improvement in um ways in which we could encourage choices and opportunities
but for the residents but also I think for the staff as well you know with better training and
better understanding really of what we were about and you know and sharing of experiences and
everything that perhaps the institution didn't have before was was seen as something that we could
now do unfettered in a way I mean it sounds ridiculous to say again it's me taking the
moral low ground unfettered by this resettlement nonsense of junk you know just I mean you know it
was um but meanwhile obviously we were still I in particular I was still planning for that you know
and um and I think there was a sort of there was a the gulf between the sort of the members of staff
and the and the parents was was actually quite wide and I think it was quite important to sort
of try to bridge that and um perhaps one of the ways in which we could do that was that we we made
quite a change as well on the in the in the way that the residents appeared by having proper clothes
I mean you've probably heard about the hospital issue clothes yeah which standard issue which
were pretty crap what they were wearing those hostiles you closed when you started yeah yeah
um and there wasn't uh and the perennial problem of course was underwear you know
underwear underwear underwear all the time you know there was there was never enough and um
underwear shade between the patients um each when I first went to this place I then I'm
memory faulty but I think people had individual underwear but there's never enough you know
and um this is just leading me onto all sorts of stuff now and so one one of the things I tried to
I tried to do is I'll come back to the parents in a minute was to encourage the staff who were
responsible for their small group to actually buy proper clothes you know take the client person
resident out shopping and buy some age-appropriate clothes and get some bloody underwear as well
you know while you're at it lots of it and I remember sess this this chat took uh took um
two people started to you know slow walks out on the hills and they loved it and it eventually
became something that was part of their week and you know would make sure that sess had perhaps a
day where he would take one particular gentleman who was really was um quite challenging at times
and he would spend six seven hours walking on the hills and he would come back in the evening
and he would be tired but happily tired you could see it you know you could see that he would
whereas before in in the evenings he would perhaps be um very energetic and perhaps and spent a lot
of his time pinching and biting and anything that he could uh that was going past him he would perhaps
just sat down in the chair and I would just think well yeah it's nice you know in the same way as I
would be reflecting on perhaps that I had an interesting day and I'm feeling a bit knackered
now and um yeah so it was things like that I think that um generally started to make make people
realize that there was perhaps a bit more to a bit more to um the work the job and and I remember
sess this this um chat took uh the bathrooms had two baths in them
and so it was natural that two people would be bathed at the same time you know why on earth
I mean speed was the essence of this sort of thing you had to get things done you know the
quick you got things done I challenged one person once and she said oh um you know because baths
were done in the evening and it was she would say this was the um sole female oh we finished
by quarter past seven and so I said what do you mean you finished you finished at nine thirty
knowing what she meant she said well we finished we'd done everything I said so what did you do
for the next two and quarter hours then well we she couldn't couldn't say what you know and it
was that sort of attitude that I was really trying to change because you didn't finish you
know you were your responsibilities were there for the people there right until you went home so
again I um said right okay bathroom privacy you know one person has a bath at a time
didn't go down too well um but that would mean we'll get everything done
a bit slower I said well yeah but I mean it doesn't mean to say you have to stay
later after your shift I'm I'm tracing this obviously you know after your shift finishes
but yeah it will be but that's the way it's going you know it needs to be done and I have to say I
um I try to encourage people to do that and I used to do it myself obviously so it was a
I believe very much in leading by example and those sort of things you know um quite a number
of the young men who lived there had parental visits which is quite surprising really and they'd
been in hospital for most of their lives yet um there was a still um yeah you know it was great
actually it was wonderful um no no um no it tended to be weekends but there was the hospital was
this wasn't me this was the hospital sort of encouraged visitors to be honest I don't think
there was any um any restrictions on on when people could come it was generally down to the way that
the the villa used to manage those sort of things and what was convenient for
the parents or the visitors um in fact I remember we had one young man who
um used to go home every other week actually which was you know it was a must have been such
a trial for his parents because my goodness he was not easy um quite a number of the young men who
lived there had parental visits which is quite surprising really um they'd been in hospital for
most of their lives yet um there was a still um yeah you know it was great actually it was wonderful
Did you fall out of the hospital by accident?
I hadn't been towards anyone
I could have productive died
it kind of made me feel a little bit worse
um I feel a little, IãŠ chassis
used to lead up to death
that was the first impression
and what was convenient for the parents or the visitors.